Okay, folks. So, this is the regular
board of finance meeting May 27th, 2026,
702. We're going to get started. We'll
start with the pledge of allegiance.
>> Pledge of allegiance to the flag of the
of the United States of America
>> and to the republic for which it stands,
one nation under God, indivisible with
justice,
>> liberty and justice for all.
>> We'll just Yeah. Okay, everybody,
welcome. Um,
>> over we have a Yeah, right. We're gonna
We have a lot on our agenda tonight, so
we're gonna try to get through it.
>> Um, obviously the first thing is a round
of public speak.
>> So, I'm going to go around I'm just
going to go through the list here um
of whoever I've got. Uh, so first up on
my list is Scott Prasan.
>> I'm good for now, Rob. Thank you.
>> All right. Very good.
Um,
he keeps moving on me. Uh, Alex is up
next.
>> Uh, just here to listen.
>> Very good.
Thank you, Linda. Derek.
>> Hi. Hi. I'd like to briefly present um
the outcome of a petition
that seven of us voters
worked on for the last few days. We have
signatures
and I'll just read it very quickly. We
the undersigned residents of Andover
respectfully submit this petition to the
board of finance for your consideration
regarding the proposed budget for the
Andover Elementary School. We urge the
board to reconsider the current budget
proposal and take the necessary steps to
reduce the increase to a maximum of
3.5%.
This adjustment is essential to ensure a
responsible fiscal balance that reflects
the needs and priorities of all of our
community. A budget aligned with this
percentage not only promotes financial
accountability but also supports the
overall well-being of all of our
residents.
So we had 86
good conversations
about this issue
and the two points that I want to make
from that conver those conversations
number one that we're talking about the
pie the tax pie
of and over the overall pie and right
now with I know it's still fluxing but
with RAM being 30% the school being 37%
leaving 32% of all tax monies for the
running of the whole rest of the town
>> does not seem fiscally sound.
>> So we ask that you consider this
and
>> appreciate your work
and hope for the best for you on all of
our behalf. Thank you.
>> Thanks Linda. Um just everybody um can
you please make sure you're muted? Uh
because I'm hearing a little background
noise. I'm not sure where that's coming
from. If you're not speaking, I mean
>> not speaking. Yeah.
>> And sorry, just for the last thing, I'm
going to scan the petition pages to you
all tomorrow. Kate was not in today, so
I'll use her scanner tomorrow to get the
actual pages to you.
>> Okay.
Up next is Anna.
>> Good evening. I'm just listening in
tonight. Um I wanted to say thank you to
the board of finance before the
elections for providing um just the line
item breakdown of the salaries for the
town. I have a follow-up um just
regarding the maintenance salaries just
in general that I'm going to follow up
with. And so I'm going to renew my
request again for line item breakdown of
all the salaries. um for the um Andover
Elementary School budget. Um and that's
that's it for this evening. Thank you
>> and creme.
>> I have nothing right now. Thank you.
>> All right. Thanks, Kaitlyn.
>> Hi. Um, I I missed the beginning of the
meeting. Sorry, I just got home from
work, so I'm not sure exactly what I
missed in public comment so far, but
just wanted to say um I don't envy you
guys at all. I know you have a really
hard job before you. Um, I do know that
whatever you end up cutting from the
school budget will directly affect the
kids. Um, it will directly affect, you
know, the number of classroom teachers
that we have or the number of paras that
we have. Um, that's the point that we're
at in the budget that we will have to
make those decisions after you guys tell
us what we're allowed to have or not
have. Um, and I I I'm obviously don't
want to be in your shoes um or in your
position. Um it does look like the
corrected um number of uh votes, you
know, in terms of too high or too low.
Um there were 50 votes less for saying
the school budget was too high than
there were for the town budget being too
high. Um I I think that's correct on the
corrected uh numbers. Um it just seems
like a very we're at you guys are at a
very narrow margin of stuff. So,
um, thank you.
>> Uh, okay. Sorry. Uh, the next person up
on the list is Carol Savage.
Going once, going twice. Oh,
>> am I here? I think I'm here, right?
>> Yes.
>> Okay. I'm just listening in. I don't
really have a lot of input. I just thank
you for your work.
>> Thank you.
>> Uh Charlie Delastro.
>> I'm all set. Thank you.
>> Thanks.
Okay. Diane Grineier.
Um, I just want to thank the 33% of the
voters who came out, took time from
their busy day to come out and vote to
um yesterday. And I hope the other 67%
of the voters that did not come out like
how um we're deciding how to spend their
tax dollars. Um I I wish you guys all
the best of luck. I know you have a hard
job and thank you very much for all you
do.
>> Thank you, Diane.
Uh the next up is listed as uh Dr.
Patricia Kelly.
>> You need to unmute, Patricia.
>> Okay, here I am. Uh no, I have no
comment. I just want to support uh the
petition that Linda mentioned earlier.
Thank you.
>> Very well. Uh next up is Elizabeth
Partridge.
Yeah, I just like the board of finance
to consider the total cost of each area
of the budget regardless of the sources
because many of these sources are
one-time and can and will disappear in
future years. So, we have to have a
clear view of what our total expenses
are and then what our total sources of
income are. Thank you for your work.
>> Thank you.
All right. uh iPhone 2 which I think we
established as Kathy.
>> No comment. Thank you.
>> Very good.
Uh Joanne,
>> hello everyone. Um just a quick comment.
I mean we know that Andover is not alone
in going through this kind of process.
All of our surrounding towns are doing
the same thing. You know, I know that
it's a hard job like you said. um you
know and and you'll have to come to some
kind of understanding. Unfortunately, I
had many ideas in the past, but I know
you're limited at what you could go for.
So, I'm hoping since you were very kind
of frugal and um limited and cautious
when you did um put some of the fund b
unallocated or I forget what we call it,
the fund balance, the leftover that's
already been taxed that we have quite a
bit of money in there. you know, we
don't have a lot of emergencies. We're
going to be getting refunded from the
Bunker Hill Bridge project, whether
that's been done or not. So, I'd love to
see you guys, whatever you decide
tonight on the education budget, and I
know that decisions will be made to
maybe give the taxpayers another 50 from
there. I think going a total of 150 from
there would help the overall picture as
well, and the taxpayers deserve that,
too. Thank you.
Thanks Joanne for your thoughts. Uh
Julie Godette,
>> just listening. Thank you.
>> Very good. Caitlyn Dalby,
>> I'm all set. Thank you.
>> Very good. Thanks.
Uh Kathy Barrett.
>> Hi. Um uh thanks for the opportunity to
to participate. This is my first board
of finance meeting. Um uh noticing um uh
as was just said that this is not just
our problem. This is echoed in towns all
around including there's a big article
in the Hartford Current today uh about
exactly this. Um, I wondered whether we
might consider the possibility of doing
what some towns have done, and that is
to um try and decrease the distrust that
seems to uh uh be very much a part of
our current school and town um budget
negotiations.
by reaching out to a qualified
um uh wellcredentialed professional um
who might be able to um for um a very
reasonable um uh expenses or for a very
reasonable expenditure. offer a informed
look at um the ways in which the school
budget in particular, but the town
budget in uh as well could be evaluated
for efficiency um and recommendations
made to support you on the board of
finance who I agree with everyone who
said you have a very hard job ahead of
you. Um, and so I'm hoping that's
something uh that might be um considered
hiring a specialist to uh advise.
Thank you.
>> Thank you,
Kevin Reagan.
Reagan, sorry.
>> Thank you. Um, given the flyer that went
out, it's hard to tell if the results
yesterday were the result of critical
thinking or the result of some people
believing that each of the 15 new kids
coming actually costs $80,000.
Um, I know that sounds ridiculous, but
that's what some people have stated that
they were under the impression of. So, I
don't know what to think other than
there obviously has been swed a lot of
mistrust with the school board and I
think it would be great if all the books
were completely opened and you got to
see what they spent on a bottle of
Windex. Um, but um that's just where I
stand. When I saw the results of the Ram
election passing by quite a good margin
and the Andover elementary budget pass
failing by about the same margin, it
made me made me realize that there's
just a huge amount of distrust with
what's going on.
>> Thank you. Um,
Linda Derek,
>> I just I already talked to you.
Remember,
>> I apolog
shifting on me. I apologize.
>> Uh, Lisa, hi. Glad you made it. Uh, our
town treasurer is here. Uh, do you have
anything to add to our discussion at
this time? Just listening as listening
as usual.
>> Very good. I hope you got your
spreadsheets ready.
>> Okay, let's see. Marcy,
>> hi. I'm all set. Thank you.
>> Okay, good to see you. Uh, let's see.
Scottyette.
>> Hi, folks.
I'm not here tonight to relitigate the
referendum. The vote happened and now
this board has to decide what to do
next. I'm here to ask you one thing.
Please don't read Tuesday's results as a
mandate to cut the Endover Elementary
budget deeply. I say that because the
public conversation about this budget
has not matched what the data actually
shows. I want to put three facts on the
record sourced from state and town
records, state and town documents, I
guess. First, Andover spends less per
pupil than any of the 44 other smalltown
elementary only districts in
Connecticut. Not less than most, the
very least. The source is the state
department of education's own edsite
portal. The full report is published on
my own website, andovert.info,
along with other related reports.
Second, the Andover preschool program is
not a drain on town finances. It is
funded by tuition and the state office
of early childhood grants. It runs from
a separate program account. This is
approximately revenue neutral to the
town. If we didn't have it, the town
would have to cover preschool special
education on its own, which cost more
than the program does. The net, the
preschool saves Andover about $100,000
per year. Third, the superintendent's
compensation, including the contractual
raise in the new agreement, is in line
with and is likely well below the
salaries of similar districts. A more
rigorous comparison would require
collecting individual contracts from
peer districts. I'm working on that
right now, but I haven't got it done.
Those are facts. They were available
before the referendum. They will still
be the facts when this board reconvenes
to set a revised budget.
One more thing on the record. The board
of education built this budget through a
monthslong public process. Meetings were
public, packets were posted, and anyone
who wanted to weigh in had months in
which to do it. that the budget that
emerged reflected real deliberation.
A district that already spends less per
pupil than every comparable district in
the state does not have meaningful facts
to cut fat to cut. Oh boy. Cuts at this
point come out of the classrooms. We
simply don't need classes with more than
25 students.
Whatever this board decides, please
decide it on the basis of what the
school actually costs to operate, not on
the basis of public conversation that
has diverged sharply from the underlying
numbers. Thank you.
>> Thanks, Scott.
Val, would you like to make a public
comment?
>> Sure.
So, a couple of things. First of all, I
I get very sad for the kids when they
have to take the school bus and go by
signs that say save and overvote no to
AES. They shouldn't have to see the
division. They shouldn't have to feel
like their school doesn't matter and
that they don't matter. And a lot of
people who are new to town may think
that this is brand new. I arrived in
2020. I can tell you that from 2015 to
2020, the school budget was decreased
every single year to the tune of
$418,000.
And when I got here in 2020,
they they told me that I was lucky that
year that I got a 0% increase. And the
conversation at many board of selectman
meetings was not about preschool. It was
about how do we close AES and send our
kids to Bolton. So the idea of the
importance of AES I it's been
long-standing that people in the town
and I respect that 87 people signed a
petition but 343
people voted yes yesterday
despite the fact that they knew that it
was an increase. Um, so I would request
that the board look at history, look at
the fact that the taxpayers, all of the
taxpayers pay into those fund balances
that this is not new. This is a
longstanding battle to just show the
respect to the elementary school and the
fact that the town itself absolutely
loves all of the families in town and
respects the budgets. And lastly,
last year we were cut 160,000 of the ask
and we were very open and honest last
year about saying that that would affect
this year because they were necessities.
And so that is why this year came in
higher than we had also hoped. So I
would just implore the whole board to
keep all of these factors in mind when
making a decision. Thank you.
smile. Uh Wally, you want to make a
public comment on the budget? We'll get
to your uh fire department request in a
bit.
>> No, I'll just wait for that. Thank you.
>> All right. Thank you, sir.
Uh I think you're there twice. So, I
think that's everyone. Now, if I missed
anyone, please do speak up. As I said,
my screen the list kept moving on me.
And if I missed someone, I do apologize.
Speak now.
Okay,
given that, uh, the next thing on the
agenda is changes, additions. What I'd
like to do, folks on the board, is move
Wall-E up. He's right now, the fire
department request is at 6A.
Um, I'd like to move that up and make it
4A and make the, uh, town administrators
report. I don't even know, is Matt here
tonight? Um, but we can make that 4B
if that's okay with everybody on the
board. So we can if Wally he wants to
take off after that he can. Anybody have
an objection to that?
>> No, I think that's a great idea.
>> All right. Well, I'll I'll just formally
move that we do that. Do I have a
second?
>> I'll second it.
>> Okay. Um let's take a quick vote. Uh
Bill,
>> yes.
>> Okay. Nick,
>> Kim,
>> yes.
>> Liz,
>> yes. Louise,
>> yes.
>> Heather,
>> And I'm a yes. Okay. Motion passes 70 to
move uh 6A to 4A. Uh which we will then
move to immediately. Uh I'll just open
by saying that this proposal came
through CIP. We've looked at it. Um the
fire department has a compressor that
fills their air tanks. It's getting very
long in the tooth and they're having
more maintenance problems with it.
and Wally went out, the fire department
went out and got three quotes. I believe
the first two quotes were about 100,000
each in that general vicinity, but the
third one came in at 65 and that is the
one that is in our packet. C can
somebody mute whatever
>> that is?
>> Got it. Sorry.
>> No problem. Um, so I I will turn it over
to Wally for a quick explainer. Uh but
the request is to authorize the fire
department's request to utilize the fire
equipment fund to purchase that
>> piece of equipment. Uh while you want to
add anything for us talking about
>> No, it's again it was purchased in 92.
It's again showing its age. Things are
starting to fail. We're having trouble
getting a mechanic that can work on it
um because the technology has changed so
much in 34 years.
And again, it's a high pressure air
compressor that purifies breathing air
for our self-contained breathing
apparatus. The uh the bid of 6528993
was the lowest of the three. We received
one from MEES out of Waterford for 110.
Another one from a company in New Jersey
that manufactures compressors and that
was at 109. And when this came in at 65,
it was kind of like there's no real
question. And we've spoken to a couple
of places that have this type of
compressor and they're happy with it.
So, we think this is a good move for the
town.
>> Thanks, W. And just a follow-up question
on that is um that price is still good,
right? We haven't
>> as of right now. Yes.
>> Okay. So, if we authorize that exact
amount, you're good to go.
>> I would suggest the 66 just to be on the
safe side.
>> Fair enough. I mean, that that's my
take. Anybody on the board have
questions for Wall-E or or me about this
one?
>> Wally, can you send us the other two um
estimates just so that we have them for
our
>> Okay. I'll I'll have to dig them up
because
>> I haven't been using them since I went
to CIP and they accepted this one. This
is really the only one that I've been
dealing with. I will dig them up and I
will get them in the system for you.
>> Okay. Thank you.
>> Anyone else the board have any questions
regarding this request?
No, I was going to say the same thing as
Liz did that we probably should have the
three of them.
>> Sure. We could just we for for the
record basically. Yeah,
>> sure.
>> But I as Wally said, you know, when we
were at CIP when we when we originally
discussed it, I think we only had one of
the original quotes, you know, was about
that 110 figure and that's what we were
looking at and then this third one came
in and it was kind of huzzah. Uh so what
I would say uh is if do we want to go
ahead and anybody want to make a motion
to approve the fire department request
to take up to $66,000
from the fire equipment fund for this
purpose?
>> How much is in the fire equipment fund?
>> Fair question. Um my recollection and I
don't have it in front of me um because
I'd have to dig it up again. Lisa had
given us a spreadsheet a while back in
PDF form. Um, but there's a there's I
think a few hundred thousand in there.
And then we load money in there every
year to make sure that we're paying for
the lease on the firetruck.
Uh, there should be more than enough in
there to cover this. But, uh, one of the
things that after we get through this
budget cycle, one of the things I really
want to tighten up on is having a, uh,
some sort of document or some sort of
spreadsheet or some sort of rolling
uh,formational
document that tells us maybe quarterly
at least what all our fund balances are.
But right now, off the top of my head, I
don't have the exact figure.
>> Lisa, if you do, let me know.
Yeah, I do believe I do believe I
brought it home.
>> Um,
>> Liz,
>> I didn't find it. Oh, Liz, you have it.
>> Yeah, so I have that in front of me.
>> Yeah, that's the one.
Um, and it's showing
that in QuickBooks,
the QuickBooks right now is 200.
No, I'm lying. It's $348,54
in that fund.
>> That sounds correct. Yeah.
>> Um and then it says reserve bank balance
for $54,786.
Um how that tallies. I'm not really
sure. Lisa is the professional on that.
>> Well, she isn't. She's still working on
it.
>> She's working on it. But
>> that's the right order of magnitude
though. that that's about right. And I
want to tighten this up for sure, but
there's enough money in there to cover,
>> especially with the money we're loading
in um because the town budget passed, so
that goes in to cover both the lease
payment on the firetruck and this
expenditure.
>> Thank you.
>> Yeah, sorry, Heather. I couldn't give
you I I would love to have been able to
just snap off the the number and going
forward, we really need to work on that.
>> Yep.
It's been a
>> challenging year
>> time of turn turnover and we're just
trying to be patient with the uh the
changes that's all.
>> Reconciling all this has been a lot
>> just happened at a bad time. That's all
>> for sure. And it was certainly a cascade
effect. Y
>> um so anyway uh any further discussion
or questions on this one?
I would make the motion that we approve
the $66,000 to purchase the new air
compressor for the fire department uh
backpacks.
>> Right. And that'll be coming out of the
fire equipment fund. Do we have a
second?
>> I'll second that.
>> Kim got it. Johnny on the spot.
All right. We'll go ahead and take a
vote. I think we've talked this one
through. Excuse me. Um, Heather,
>> yes.
>> Nick,
>> Louise,
>> yes.
>> Liz,
>> Kim,
>> yes.
>> Bill,
>> Me, yes. That's 70. Wally, you got your
compressor authorization via Dios. If
you want to take off, by all means.
Otherwise, stick around for the
discussion.
>> I appreciate you moving me up. Yesterday
was a very long day for me, so it's nice
to get a little sleep. Thank you very
much.
>> Good night, sir.
>> Thank you,
>> take care.
>> Okay, so
having made that change to the agenda,
4B was administrator report. I don't
know if we have our administrator
though, so we might just be moving past
that.
>> I don't see him there.
So, um, I'll have to get in touch with
Matt on that. Um, all right. Old
business,
the main event.
Uh, so we have the budget referendum
discussion. We know the results if
memory serves from doing math last
night. The AAS budget failed about 50
5644 something along those lines. The my
understanding is that the RAM
operational budget failed overall. We
and over voted in favor, but I believe
it failed enough in Hebrin that it
knocked it into they'll have to go back
and revise yet again. The Ram capital
budget passed, the Andover town budget
passed. So what we are left with is AAS
and whatever the RAM board of ed
ultimately does with their ops budget.
Um so let's see the next thing about
that. Let me just take a quick look at
one more thing.
Okay. So, as you guys remember, last
time we took a whack at this, we made a
$50,000 cut. That was my idea. It did
not suffice. The electorate has spoken.
So, what I'd like to do is open up
discussion for what do we think will get
this done? I certainly don't want to
drag this out anymore. I'd want to get
this thing through. I want to get it
passed. So, thoughts.
>> I'd like to speak.
>> Go ahead, Louise.
>> Okay. Um, I 100% support Linda's effort
for that petition at the 3 and 12%
increase. Um,
we work for the town. Well, we're
volunteers for the town and we work for
the people in the town. And the people
have spoken twice to us stating that the
AES budget is too high regardless of the
the counts. It's too high. So, we need
to do our civic duty and appease our
fellow people in our town because they
came out to vote and we have a duty to
upstand what they they expect from us.
>> So, I I really like that. three and a
half%. I don't know how everyone else
feels about it, but the 87 people also
uh decided that that was a very good
amount. And again, I thank Linda for all
her effort in doing that because that
was a lot of work, I'm sure. Thank you,
Linda.
>> So, I have a comment, too. I mean, I'll
just um I appreciate all the work that
she must have gone through. Um,
but
my concern is more how did we how did we
get here? And so I just wanted to talk
about how we got here, where we are this
year with, you know, the need, the 11%
ask that was asked for. And last year
the ask was 8.9% and they were hoping to
hire 3.1 new FTE.
Two were fifth and fourth and fifth
grade teachers
and one was a math interventionalist, I
believe. And
after the the budget failed,
the board of finance went back and gave
them a 5% increase.
I rewatched their their uh the board of
eds uh meeting after that to figure out
how they were going to get to that $160
some odd dollar cut and kind of thought
there would be discussion about what do
we do? We're, you know, we're wanting to
hire three new people. How do we make
this happen? Is it prudent to hire three
new people? But that discussion didn't
happen. The discussion that happened was
what areas can we basically subtract
money for from
and knowing that we'll probably be in a
deficit, we can fall back on the 2%
non-lapsing rainy day fund.
And
I I personally have a problem with that
that take on it. Um, I I think the fact
that they did not discuss maybe maybe we
can't afford to hire three new teachers
this year. Maybe we only hire two. Um,
and I understand, you know, class sizes
and whatnot. I know the the fourth grade
class is a much larger group. I totally
get that.
>> Um,
>> and then the current fifth grade class
is 25, I think. um the class moving on
to sixth grade is going to be 25 anyway.
Um I don't know how they they manage
their classes during during the day. Um
but I would imagine that fourth and or
fifth and sixth grade classes don't sit
in the same room all day. I'm sure that
they're preparing with trading classes
and whatnot.
But anyway, my point is
they totally ignored that and now we're
in a position where we need to feel bad
if we cut their budget.
I just
I don't know. I question the prudence of
it and I question the legality of
passing a going forth with a budget
knowing that you're going to be in a
deficit.
Um
I know there's other options. Um,
before I get to that, the other thing
that I want to point out is, um, I sent
you all the the board of ed's latest May
financial report
because we usually get it in our packet
and we didn't get it. Um, I tried to get
it to Kate so she could upload it, but
um, she's out. She's out today anyway.
And as it stands right now, um, with
their current expenditures
and incumbrances,
as of right now, they have a balance.
They would have a balance of about
$56,000,
which I was kind of surprised. Um, I
know they're going to be asking for the
975 from the 2% non-lapsing. Um, but
regardless, separate from that, it
appears at this point that there's a
$56,000 balance.
So that combined with the difficulty in
response in in getting the data and the
information we've asked for, I don't
feel like we have a full accounting of
really what they have or what they need.
And I would support the three and a half
percent.
Um, that's that's where that's where I'm
coming from.
And I'll let somebody else chime in.
>> Um,
>> I'd like to hear how other people feel.
>> I'll I'll chime in. Um, I agree with a
lot of what Liz is saying, like with if
the school didn't do anything last year
and hired the teachers anyway. Um, and I
see that they have a $50,000 balance.
That's really good. Um, but I don't I
don't think I really agree with the 3.5
because
a lot of their increases due to benefits
and the 3.5 wouldn't even really cover
the increase in benefits and that's not
just the school trying that they have to
take those that benefit increase. So, I
think we need to at least cover that and
I don't think we need to appease the
town people. We need to work and figure
out what we want to do. And I think for
going forward the school and the finance
like everybody needs to work together
better. Like this was horrible. So
>> yeah,
>> you know, it need we need to we need to
find a way forward better. We need to
have a good school. We need to have
transparency. Um so it's been really
hard for the new of us new people on
here to figure out what is really
needed. Um, I know we're going to need
to cut, um, but I don't support the
three and a half because I don't think
that even covers their benefit increase
this year. And so I think they're going
to need more than that, but
that's it. C,
>> can I weigh in a little bit here?
>> Hi. Hi.
>> Well, it's it's not public speak.
>> Oh, okay. I'm sorry. I won't
>> I ask a clarifying question on the
report you sent, Liz. Um I don't know
who the right person to answer this is
but we have um expended year-to- date
um this is an account activity as of
6:30 calendar date right until for
fiscal year end seven end of June or
July
>> June 30th.
the end of the fiscal year, right?
>> June 30th. Yep.
>> Yep.
>> So, Nick, what are your what are your
thoughts on this?
>> Um, I I I think we're in a
hard spot as well. Um, I do know I kind
of did some math similar to Heather's.
We got a salary increase for all staff.
If you take the 5% there, you take the
benefits,
I mean
>> 3%.
>> And you take the psychologist, I I'm
seeing an increase for the school side
with all that of at least
I would say 400,000.
So,
and I'm looking at that's why I asked
the clarifying question. I wanted to
make sure I had the actual data. I did
it from actual I did it from actuals to
date and I kind of just did quick math
right now on um projected and actuals
and what the total expense would be. So
I I could see
how that would be
I could see how we would have to go up
on a lot of those accounts just from a
standpoint of we have actuals in front
of us and we have the salaries in front
of us and we know what we do about the
benefit package and we know what we do
about the salaries currently.
So, we have to come up with we have to
come up with a a number that the
taxpayers will accept. And I think
this board obviously is not going to
accept 3.5. Um,
but we certainly we certainly don't want
to start from a high point and end up
having to come back here because it
costs $3,000 every time we do
>> every time we do a
>> I agree with you.
>> Absolutely.
>> Can I Can I
>> Liz, were you done? Because then by all
means Yeah. Go ahead.
>> Um, Heather, I agree with you. It's been
a tough budget season. Um, I'm going to
go back to where we started where I said
that a lot of taxpayers had contacted me
over the course of the last season and
said 2 to 4% 2 to 4%.
And you guys said
let's let the voters decide.
>> Mhm.
>> So they did.
>> And then they did again. Mhm.
>> So,
as tough as it is, I am more comfortable
with the 3.5%
to be fair to everyone.
And I I know this is tough. It's been
very very tough.
But I think we need to listen. And I and
this is information that I had from a
lot of people before I even heard about
this petition that our community people
did, which thank you for all of you that
did that.
And I I think for now I'll just
end it with that.
>> So, do we want to make a motion for the
3.5 and see where it goes? Oh, go ahead,
Bill. Go ahead, Bill.
>> So, I think
everybody knows, as Heather and Nick
just said,
the increase in the cost of insurance
alone wouldn't be covered by 3.5%.
The increase in the teacher salary,
mandatory contractoral salary by 3%.
the $45,000 for the loss grant for the
psychiatrist. These are not fluff icing
on the cake madeup things. Okay? So, if
you don't cover those increases, you're
going to take more away from what they
had last year. Whatever they had last
year, something has to go away. Not
adding new things this year.
Things have to go away. So, we offer
less of ed education next year than we
did this year. Is what you're saying.
We're not even going to cover their
costs is what Listen, I don't like
paying taxes more than anybody else.
But you're talking about slashing our
kids' education.
And I've heard everybody on this call,
everybody on the board of ed, everybody
on the board of select men, all we love
our kids. We support education. But
three and a half% you know that doesn't
even come close to covering the cost
increases contractual
increases.
So you're being irresponsible to say
three and a half% because you know
you're going to slash into
the school's ability to function. I mean
it's just ridiculous
how you can have with a conscious
actually I'm still speaking. I don't
know how you can have a conscience and
say three and a half percent. When you
know, I mean, there's people out there
in the community, they don't know all
the facts. There's all kinds of talk
going on this way and that way, but
everybody in this board knows that those
are real increases that have to be
covered. You know that. So, three and a
half%. What are you going to tell Val
and the board of ed that she has to
throw out the window that's there this
year?
>> I'd like to make a comment.
>> Yeah, go ahead.
>> Sorry. Go ahead. Um, we don't really
know that, Bill, because we don't have
all the information.
So,
>> well, come on.
>> How do you know? Well, how do you know
that it's not going to cover? Do you
have the the dollar amounts in front of
you saying, "Okay, it's this amount and
this amount and this amount, and what
about all those other things that we
requested, and we don't know? We don't
know. The transparency isn't there." So,
we're guessing.
>> That's my That's my point on it.
>> Can I chime into this point? I mean,
obviously, I wanted to let everybody
have their say. I didn't want to
dominate this discussion.
>> My hope tonight was that we could arrive
at a figure as a board. I I I hoped we
could find a consensus where maybe we
could even all agree on and and take
that to the town and and get a budget
passed. And
I was not hoping that the the start
would be at 3.5. I'll admit that. I also
recognize, however, that the cut we made
last time was insufficient,
that it wouldn't, you know, and making
another small cut like that won't get it
done. I am perfectly willing to be
reasonable about that and try to find a
way as the last thing I want is to fail
at referendum again.
So, you know, I have some numbers in my
head, but at the end of the day, what it
really boils down to is what is the
overall number that this town can
stomach? Right now, we're just a touch
over 5 million for that budget. The ask
the increase at this point after we made
our last cut, right, is 448 and change.
Just about $450,000.
If you did 3.5,
right, that's an increase of about 160
over last year.
If you did 7.5,
which at one point this board
recommended, that's an increase of 342
409. So just shy of 350. They're at 450
now.
So my thinking going into tonight was
that we could make a cut somewhere in
the range of 100,000 to 150 off of where
they are now.
the cut that you're talking about is so
drastic that I can't honestly I can't
support that even though I really want
to get a budget passed and I really want
to be responsive to the vote to the
referendum results. I I'd like to find a
place between where they're at now, plus
450 and what what you're talking about.
As I said, the 3.5 is a plus about 160.
Somewhere between those two, I'd love to
find common ground if we could. And you
know, as much as we can get into the
weeds about this or that or the other
specifics,
at the end of the day, what it matters,
the topline number is what we're here to
talk about. and and try to find a way
that we can
compromise on this and then hopefully
pass it through. So, and the other thing
I'd just like to throw out there and I
know this is not the specifically the
topic of AES, but as you all know, you
know, RAM will have to come back and
revise their budget again. So, that's
out there. I don't know what they're
going to do, but that's a factor as
well. Um and that you know any any
decision they make there uh would change
our levy. So uh so that was sort of my
thinking. I absolutely agree that the
referendum results barely budged. I
think the first time it was 5842 and
this time it was 5644. They're basically
you know in line with make another cut.
So I'm with you Liz. Go right ahead.
I just wanted to um touch on something
Bill had said that they have contractual
contractual increases that it's not even
going to cover. Well, that's the
school's responsibility. That's the
board board of ed's responsibility. Like
I said, last year their budget was cut
and they completely disregarded that cut
and hired those people anyway. So, they
locked in those new contracts for three
new hires. And now we're having to now
we're having to deal with it. And they
want to hire a new teacher for sixth
grade in this new budget for a class
that's going to have 25 kids. A a class
of 25 uh sixth graders that probably
don't even all sit in the same class at
the same time. I'm sure they move
around. Um
so there's got to be some give and take.
and for them to just disregard
the budget that we gave them and say,
"Well,
we'll hire these people. We'll figure it
out next year." And that's what
happened. So, don't get angry when we
try to make, you know, have a
conversation about maybe a three and a
half. And I'm not saying three and a
half is going to pass with us. I don't
think it will. But you got to think
about these things. They are the ones
that are in control. And when I say
they, I don't mean that in a derogatory
term. I mean the board of ed, they're
they're in control of the written
contracts as they are and they're in in
um control of how many people they hire.
And if they're sitting there in a board
of ed meeting figuring out how they're
gonna how they're going to manage their
new cut budget and not even have a
discussion about how can we manage the
human resources that we have here right
now to maybe hold off on hiring one or
two of these people. That discussion did
not happen. And I'm sorry. I think
that's irresponsible.
So, we have a responsibility to be
neutral and try to
come up with something that the town
will accept and something that they can
figure out how they're going to how
they're going to manage their budget.
>> Can I say something? So I agree with Liz
like um also their first budget came out
we proposed seven and a half
and it didn't seem like there was any
discussion on their end. They just said
no keeping
>> said no.
>> So
>> and can I yeah can I can I make one
comment?
>> Yeah I think we do need to be neutral
and figure it out but we everyone I
don't know I keep coming back to we need
to work together better because it just
seems all just
>> I agree with you.
Yeah, I agree with you too. And and I'd
also like to point out the fact that
that rejection that we got didn't even
go to a full board of ed meeting to
discuss and vote on.
And I think that's wrong, too.
>> Can I I'm going to add to your
discussion one one thing.
No one has discussed tuition for the
prek and if that number is appropriate.
And I like Rob talking. They are
providing a phenomenal service. They
have four certified teachers, four paras
for for those kids. And there's no
discussion
that I've heard that how much additional
revenue could be raised by charging the
parents a better closer to fair market
value. I'm not even saying get to fair
market value, but if you want to sit
there and be able to afford everything
that the the board of education wants to
do, then you have to look at every
lever. And if you're not,
then you're going to keep coming back.
>> I mean, they can't use prek money for K
through six.
>> That was going to be my question.
Well, you know, I sit there and I go
through the uh the handbook that I was
given this week and I have uh an early
childhood specialist. I would ask you,
Rob, how much of the services for the
psychologist and the occupational
therapist and all of those people are
being used for prek? So, all of the
things that supposedly Scott Soyette
has, all of this data and all this
information are all questions I would
like to ask. I would like that
information provided to the board of
finance so that we can sit there and
make a reasonable decision. So, you
can't tell me that we can't increase our
tuition because I'll guarantee you there
are ways that you could sit there and
offset those expenditures on things that
they're already being paid for. So,
listen, you guys got hard. This is not
easy, but it is going to get harder
every year because you guys are going to
end up looking at these contracts that
have been signed and you have a real
problem coming down the road. And it and
I said this last year, you know,
everybody gets all mad, thinks I've been
anti school, this and that. I only got
involved last year and I got involved
really late and I wasn't loud enough.
And what I said to you guys before you
passed your budget last year, I said you
give it to the board of education, it is
never coming back. So when you sit there
and say, "Okay, I'm going to give them 7
and a half%." And that's the number that
you allow them to sit there and utilize
to sit there and and set their baseline.
You're not getting it back. You're not
going to be able to claw it back the
next year. And so so what I sit there
and you have to make the board of
education work. So pull every lever that
they can for the benefit of the
community. Raise tuition, right? You
could raise a lot of additional dollars
to sit there and offset costs that are
happening in that school. And then yeah,
they might the board of education might
have to make a very difficult decision
that nobody here really wants to do, but
they might have to do it. You have you
have set up for next year two teachers
in every grade. So two preK, two first
grade, two second grade, two third
grade, two fourth grade, two fifth
grade, two sixth grade. They might have
to make a hard decision. Never easy.
This is not easy. It's not fun. No one
likes to do it. But I'm I am telling
you, I'm sitting here telling you guys,
it's unsustainable moving forward. You
have to make them make some some cuts or
you'll you're you're you're in a lot of
we're in a lot of trouble the town. And
listen, I'd like to save the school. I
just might be too late.
I'm just telling you, you guys might not
think about it that way, but that's how
I think about it because I I recommend
highly that you guys go look at the
teachers contract that just went into
place this year. Go look. go look and
see where you guys are at and see what's
going to happen in 10 years when all
these young people are all at the top
step. How is this town going to afford
it? And then take that contract and go
look at Hebrin and go look at Marbor and
go see all those other contracts and see
how it works because we've had a very
very poor
uh set of decisions made on behalf of
the financial status of this town. So,
I'm just telling you there's other
levers. You have to ask them to pull
them. You cannot just give them
everything that they want because it's
just not going to work long term for the
top. So, I'm done. Thanks, Jeff. I I
actually was going to mention that, too.
It's on my It's on my checklist. Um
about increasing um tuition. It has It's
been $6,000 since going back at least as
far as 2019,
which I mean,
>> yeah. everything else has gone up. Why
hasn't tuition? But the other thing is
we know we we don't know exactly how
much it's costing the general fund, but
we do know that the salaries and the
taxes, etc. are being covered under the
general fund. And we're told that it's
covered under the general fund because
of because we have to cover special ed
needs. But we don't know how much that
dollar number is. I asked for it and it
wasn't given to us. We asked for it. We
asked for an aggregate number and it
wasn't given to us. We don't know how
much that number is. And if they raised
tuition, say even $2,000,
I mean, if that would help offset the
teachers compensation, the teachers
benefits, etc. That would be a help as
well.
Um anyway,
>> and just one thing, does anybody on the
board of finance before asking the
anyone from the board of education, do
you guys know how many new children are
going to be in between preK and sixth
grade next year? Do you know the number?
Anybody on this board?
How many children are going to be added
to the roster next year? The anticipated
estimated number? Anybody?
>> No.
>> My recollection, you mean K what the K36
number will be next year?
>> Yeah. Go ahead.
>> My recollection is we're we were at 192
the beginning of this year.
>> We got a big class graduating. The the
sixth grade class going to RAM is 29 I
believe.
>> Mhm.
>> Um so they're off. I think the incoming
to kindergarten is is in the mid 20s
like 25 26 somewhere like that.
The the the question is who moves into
town with kids or whatever. I would
expect personally and it's a guesstimate
that we'd be roughly similar to last
year. Maybe even down a kid or twoish.
>> Okay.
>> So, you're going to go down children.
>> I don't know if we're going to go down
children. I'm saying
>> Okay. Let's just say let's just say
we're at we're at the same number. So,
we're at the same number and our costs
are escalating somewhere between four
and $500,000.
be
>> I know we're I know we're adding an
extra teacher.
>> It would be about 26,000 a kid. Well, I
mean, not if we make this cut.
Not going to get added.
>> Well, that but that's the that's
basically the the the that's the ask is
I'm going to 5 million 13,000 and I'm
adding a sixth grade or a fifth grade
teacher. One of those two.
>> Six. It's six.
>> Okay. But no increases in children.
>> Correct.
>> Right. the the issue was was that the 24
25 26 whatever it is kids in that class
they felt educationally they needed two
classes instead of one and if we cut
them I expect that's going to be on the
chopping block.
>> Um but you know at a $5 million budget
about 190 kids and you're at about
26,000 a kid. That's that's the that's
the price.
>> Well, you know you guys have a very
unenviable task. You have to get a
budget that will get through the voters
of this town. And with
>> where you're at,
you need to sit there and and make it
reasonable for the voters because you
have you have a group of voters that are
there's there's a group of of younger
voters that sit there and I I I know
what they're doing. I did it when I was
in there. I just wanted a budget passed.
So, you're going to sit there and
you got to make a cut that's that's
sizable enough that the voters, the 80
voters that signed that position
petition will sit there and come and and
vote yes because they're your swing
vote. So,
>> I don't look I know we have to make a
cut that's going to get through uh
regardless of actually which group of
people is the the swing vote. We need to
flip those referendum results. We're at
5644 against. We need to get uh we need
to turn that around. And I for one I I
keep saying it. I I am willing to
entertain a cut. I think the 3.5%
proposal is too drastic. But I am
absolutely willing to try and find a way
to meet in the middle to try to find a
compromised solution so that we can get
this passed one last time, one last
referendum and then we're done.
and then we can move on to a lot of
other things that I'd really like to
accomplish this year.
So, you know, financial
>> I'll make a motion.
>> I'll make a motion. I'll make a motion
if we want to try to move on. I don't I
didn't mean to interrupt you if you were
done.
>> No, no. I You know what? That's fine. I
I do want to just stay focused on tasks.
So, go right ahead.
>> Okay. So, I know the three and a half is
not going to go anywhere. So, I'm going
to make a motion for this might not go
anywhere either, but starting point. I'm
going to make a motion that we
um
accept an increase for uh of 4% from the
current current year's budget.
>> I'm just going to do
>> instead of a 3% instead of three and a
half it's four.
I got to find my
>> I'm doing the math on it Liz right now
just so we have the number
>> like 180,000 I think increase. Uh, so it
would be equals
this. God, there we go.
Okay.
Yeah, I mean, it's going to be in that
in that range because it was 160 at
three and a half. So, I'm just having my
spreadsheets fighting me. Sorry.
>> You said you said how much was it? Um,
Heather,
>> this
>> I show it at 189.
>> I show
>> Yeah. 182
>> 182 61848 is what I'm getting.
>> I have 182 627. So close enough.
>> Wow. Why?
>> Close enough. Close enough for
discussion purposes
>> for government work, I guess you could
say.
>> Yeah.
>> I will second that motion.
>> Did you hear me, Rob?
>> Yeah, I heard you. That's second by
Luis.
>> Yeah.
All right. So, Liz motions 4% Louise
seconds
discussion on this motion. Um, I'll just
say for my part, I don't know that I
could to support that number, but I also
understand where we're at. Um, I have
thoughts, too. I haven't put forward a
proposal yet. I wanted to let you guys
make one and see how it played out. So,
I'll step back. Any other members of the
board want to have their say on this one
before we take a vote?
All right, hearing none.
>> I think it's a fair I think it's fair. I
was just waiting to see if anybody else
had anything to say. I think it's a fair
compromise. I really do.
>> I think I think so, too. And again, we
have to listen to the public and we are
part of the public as well. So, I think
it's very fair.
>> I do.
Otherwise, we're back here again.
>> Well, I certainly agree that we have to
make a cut that's sufficient to make
sure that we're not back here again.
>> Right.
>> We will be back.
>> It's a question of it's a judgment call
as to where exactly that number exists.
>> Exactly.
>> What the numbers? Yep.
>> We have to listen to what people have
spoken.
>> Sure. I agree with that. And I mean, you
could interpret the results and the
comments.
>> We're all interpreting that. Mhm.
>> Right.
>> To me, it doesn't say 4%, but it also
doesn't say,
>> you know, make another minor cut and and
then get rejected again. You know, I'm
I'm I'm listening. I just don't
necessarily go in the same place you're
going with it.
>> Does anybody
>> Bill has a question?
>> Yep.
>> Was not a question. It's just a comment
that I I'm kind of repeating myself. I
still think 4% doesn't even come close
to covering the cost increases they had
this year. So, I know that we have to
cut. I'm not blind to that. I'm just
saying, can we be reasonable and at
least try and come close to covering
some of the cost increases they have. I
mean, obviously, they're not going to
get a teacher, not going to get a lot of
other things that they would like, but I
think we have to be responsible as far
as covering increases that they have no
control of.
>> Bill,
>> I think you all know that 4% doesn't do
that.
I'm not uh Bill I like to say I'm not
quite sure if it does or it doesn't but
we don't know.
>> We don't know.
>> We know.
>> So we're going with what we where you
have to go with
>> the motion.
>> Um Nick had raised his hand. So I just
want to make sure
>> I'm just curious. Um I want to make sure
I'm tracking my numbers right. We got
federal funding for a certain amount. We
got our budget increased.
>> State what?
And
>> you mean the state funding?
>> Yeah. State.
>> Sorry. I just wanted to be clarified. I
don't mean to interrupt. I apologize.
But the 80,000
>> Yeah, I appreciate that. I just want to
see where we stand at a total impact to
taxpayers and how much total impact to
taxpayers each hypothetical
number would be. And I just want to make
sure I'm tracking the math correctly.
So, I want to make sure we're kind of
assessing like hypothetically speaking,
what's our current mill rate? What would
each of these number impacts be to the
mill rate for the town?
>> So, if my math's right, this is about a
two $265,000
cut
um
to the ask, right,
to get down from 450 to the 182. If you
plug that number
into the Miller rate
chart
and you take off
that amount,
I suspect we're going to be we're not
going to be quite flat, but it's going
to be a very small increase. Hang on one
moment.
All right. So if we plug that in, the
mill rate would actually drop.
That's not the total amount to be raised
by taxation number because that and the
mill rate aren't the same because the
grand list changes. Just so everybody
understands,
by my math on my spreadsheet, the total
to be raised by taxation, if we went
with a 4% increase to AES, the total to
be raised by taxation number for the
town of Andover this year would be
plus.37%.
>> And that's before RAM that's before RAM
does what they do. That's before RAM,
which is another $100,000 easily.
>> Now, and to be to be fully fair and
transparent, others have brought this
up, so I'll hit the point, too,
that there are numbers in this budget
for on the revenue side that almost
assuredly go away next year. You know,
the state aid, the ext the supplemental
state aid figure, for instance, you
don't expect them to necessarily do that
again. and the RAM offset is a one shot.
So that's to that's should be we have to
consider that holistically,
>> right?
It's really a kind of a separate in in
my opinion
it's a separate discussion. How we pay
for it, how we pay for it, how the
taxpayers pay for it is separate from
how how much money they're going to get
to spend.
But I can appreciate you wanting to
know.
>> Focus focus on the expenses.
>> Okay.
>> Because the expenses the expenses stay
there year after year,
>> right? They're not going away,
>> right?
>> It just helps kind of get me a full
picture though because we're going to
put this information in front of the
community. So I I like to get the full
picture. I just got notification too.
People are in the waiting room.
>> Oh, apologies. I keep admitting people
and then I don't always see Yep.
Hopefully that I just admitted everyone.
Um yeah, I understand focusing on
expenditures. I mean to me I look at
both sides. Uh you you got to look at
that as to budgets don't come down. They
are sticky for sure. Uh we have seen
them come down but that was in the
context of the enrollment decline we
had.
So yeah, I understand if you have the
258 uh RAM offset disappear and the
80,000, you know, it was 98, but 80,000
of it was earmarked for education
disappear
starting out next year. That's an issue.
So again, this is a little steep for me,
but I understand where you're at. I just
wanted to give everybody what the number
was. So, you know, especially since Nick
asked.
So, that's that's the math as I see it.
At 4%, you'd be at an AES budget of
about 4.75 million. 4,748,000
and change. That's the number that 4%
would produce.
That produces a mill rate, if my
calculations are correct, of 31.4 four
and an increase to taxation of, you
know, and again including those oneshot
revenue items of less than half a
percent. So that's what we're talking
about. Do we have further comments or
should we take a vote on this motion?
>> Let's take a vote.
>> I'm good with taking a vote. Should we
take a vote on taking a vote?
>> No,
>> I don't want to be here until 11:00.
Thanks. All in favor of taking a vote.
>> Yeah. Yeah. All right. So, let's, you
know, let's go ahead. Um, I'll start
with Kim.
>> Yes.
>> Kim is a yes. Louise,
>> yes.
>> Is a yes. Liz, it's your motion. I
assume you're a yes, but
>> I'm a yes.
>> You're a yes. All right.
>> Bill,
>> no.
>> Bill is a no. Nick,
>> No. Heather,
>> no.
>> No. And I too am an O. But I do want to
keep this discussion going because I
think there's a place we could meet in
the middle and find a way.
>> I think
>> I think I just I think it's really we
need to find a number that's going to
pass
>> for some people. No matter what that
number is, they're going to vote no.
>> I think
>> that's always the case,
>> right? So we have to come up with a some
reasonable
number that will we want it to pass.
So
okay
we've talked about 3.5 we've talked
about four.
I mentioned you know we talked about in
the past we've talked about 7.5.
Uh
>> that is what we sent to the board then
the is 7.5 was this board's
recommendation
>> that that was the original
recommendation obviously a lot of
water's gone under the bridge since then
I would say just for the edification did
I did I tell you guys because I did the
math on the 7.5 what that would be did I
did I share that
>> no
>> I think that's an increase of 342
409 that's what I'm getting
>> instead of the 448 that they're ate.
>> So that would be about a, you know,
that's that's a little over $100,000 cut
from the current ask, which would be a a
little over $150,000 cut from the
original ask. If that's deemed
insufficient, then the question becomes,
is there something that we can find
between the motion that just failed,
you know, and and again, I would just
urge everybody to look at referential
results as I if it's a true if it's a
complete landslide like you have in
Hebrin,
you know, that was 7525 when they voted
Ram down the first time. When we're at
5644, it's a clear no. And we have to do
we have to make cuts for sure, but it's
it also isn't something that where I
want to go all Defcon one on the budget.
So in between there somewhere, what can
we find? What can we do? And can we
maybe get to more than four votes? That
would be even better. I'd love it if we
could. None of us will be thrilled,
right? Because we some of us are
starting at 3.5. Some of us are starting
with, you know, seven and a half, eight
in our heads.
Well, Rob, I think I think it's fair to
say though that we're not starting there
because of what we feel. We're starting
there because we work for the taxpayers
and that's that's been their general
consensus to us. So,
>> well, I mean, I
>> you know, it it sounds kind of personal
sometimes when those words are thrown
out at me. I'm here representing
everyone in the town of Andover.
>> As am I.
There's a lot of people that support the
education.
>> I'm not personally attacking
>> and Bill I support it as well.
>> I'm not I am not personally attacking
you, Kim. And I and I really genuinely
don't know where my words went wrong
there and I but I'll try and tighten
that up. I am not attacking anybody and
I'm not saying that anybody here is uh
you know off on their own personal thing
that you're we're all trying to respond
>> so
>> to the town. So, can I can I ask So, we
we sent to the board of ed seven and a
half
and we just said no to the four. So, are
you saying the seven and a half will
probably be a no for a lot of people?
So, we're trying to get somewhere
between seven and a half and four.
>> I don't know. I mean, I personally would
would be okay. I mean, seven and a half
represents another $100,000 cut. Like I
said, a little bit more.
So
the question becomes, what is that? We
made a $50,000 cut. That wasn't enough.
If we add tack another $100,000 cut on
top of that, we're at 150 from the
original ask. If that if if we don't
think that's enough, okay, what is the
number? And and this is a judgment call.
This is a
we don't want everyone to go with 5%.
Does that work for us?
I'll do the math. Um,
>> before we do the math, I mean,
>> Heather, Nick,
>> well, no, I need to do the math. So,
>> yeah. I mean,
400 people have voted yes in this
budget. Almost 400 people. So, it's not
like it's a townwide referendum against
the school. I mean, you guys ask the
town spoken. Everybody said no. There's
400 people that said yes. There's
>> I have I have for 105 I have like that's
a $4.79 budget.
>> So, it's 200 269,000
cut from the original.
>> Uh, sorry, I was doing it the other way.
I was looking at what the increase would
be from last year. I got
>> 228
>> 228. Yeah. $228,000 increase. Yeah.
So that would be a little less than that
would be
yeah close to half of where we are now
because I mean we were at 9.8 right that
that the referendum that just failed as
was at a 9.8% increase so a 5% increase
is roughly speaking cutting down in
half.
Um
yikes.
Uh, okay.
Let me ask this.
Yeah. I mean,
gosh,
I admit my thoughts on this are
unsettled and I'm I'm trying to work my
way through it.
>> Would anybody entertain 6%.
I'm just doing the math on on what to
see what that does. I mean, yeah. Equals
1.06 times that.
And then we have equals
that minus.
>> So, yeah, that that'd be an increase of
just shy of 274, which yeah, that that
would get them to
4.8ish. 4.8 8 4,839,389
is what I get. I don't know why our
numbers don't exactly match up.
>> Are you you referring to the 5%.
>> No, Bill asked about six. So, I was
running the numbers on six.
>> So,
>> 5%. Sorry. 5% was the number we were
talking about earlier, the 228 increase.
>> 228 273.
>> Yep.
So the original ask the original ask was
499. Okay. So 59 $500,000 basically.
>> Yeah. Basically 500. Yep.
>> 250,000
would be half of that. So that's
>> and that should be about 5.5, right?
>> Because it was originally 11%.
>> Yep.
>> Sorry, I didn't mean to interrupt you. I
was
>> Oh, no. That's fine. I I would be I
would feel successful at five and a
half.
I would feel successful at six.
>> Not I wouldn't feel successful at six. I
feel that
>> we could cut
>> but it's
>> I got to go to sleep at night and and
know that I didn't
>> totally, you know, just
>> screw our kids over here. So I I would
feel I mean I don't feel good at six,
but I know we got to pass something. So
that would be my number.
>> I'm still not gonna sleep tonight.
I'm not going to sleep tonight no matter
what happens. And again, we have to
remember how we got here. We got here
>> because they didn't listen to the voters
last year. And so now the hard
discussion has to happen.
>> That's not our fault. It's not our
fault.
>> No, it's not. But it's not a it's not a
we can punish the board and Ed and Val
for not doing what you think is the
right thing. But the bottom line, the
only people that lose are the kids. We
have to do what is right for the kids.
That's what we have to do. What is the
thing for our children?
>> Y
>> not I don't think a 5 and a half% I
don't think a 5 and a half% increase is
going to hurt any children. I really
>> I agree with that. I agree.
>> I agree. It doesn't cover the
>> Can I Can I Can I
>> We don't know that.
>> I want I want to pull this together here
and and because I don't guys we're
relitigating stuff like we know where we
everybody stands, right? The question is
can we can we compromise at six or 5.5
and send this thing to referendum? And I
think at at those numbers at that level
it's a passable budget. I really do.
That's a significant cut from where we
are. It's a much more significant cut
than we made last time. And again, we're
looking at, you know,
we need to we need to move some votes
for sure. But that is a that is a
significant move. Either either one. All
right. I would throw my weight behind
the six. Um, you know, I'd love to see
if we get to to four, five, six, seven
votes to for that. If we can't, we can
talk about it some more for sure. But
what I don't want to do, guys, is have a
bunch of cross talk again about who
cares about the kids and who doesn't or
who cares about the town and who
doesn't. We all care about the town. We
are all here.
>> Absolutely.
>> Because we do. All right. That's why we
spend hours doing this, right? So,
>> it's just so stipulated, right, that we
all care.
>> Uh, I'd like to make a motion.
>> May I make a motion?
>> By all means, make a motion. I'd like to
make the motion to go 5%.
Because that's a compromise from what
the town is talking to us and what
other people are saying
and I think that's very fair.
There's a $220,000 cut from the current
ask roughly. Just FYIformational.
>> Informationational.
>> Okay.
>> It's not an attack, right? I want
everybody to be clear.
>> Okay.
Do we have a second on that motion?
>> I'll second it.
>> You'll second it, Kim. Okay. Elise
Louise moves for 5%.
Kim seconds.
Um, yeah, we've been talking about this.
You know, I'm I'm a lot more comfortable
at six than I am at five. I don't love
either number, but I I'll let the chips
fall or they may. And I think we should,
unless there's anybody else who wants to
pipe up. Let's call for a vote on this
one.
>> I don't know if it's I I just wanted to
share some of the thought process I was
working through. I don't know if now's
the appropriate time or not. Sure, it
>> is. But um I just went through the sheet
that Liz sent out which has some actuals
and expenditures year to date. I kind of
did my quick level assessment. It looks
like we have a balance of what each
one's going to be at the end of the
year. It looks like we have um total
benefits.
I did some math just based on this
because this is the numbers I have in
front of me right now.
I it looks to keep it according to my
highle assessment what I did is I
anticipated $160,000ish
increase to the benefits if we take that
account and multiply it by 21%. My
numbers could be a little off. I'm I'm
welcoming input. the psychologist which
we lost a grant for is 45,000
and I got another 90,000
in salary increases that brought my
total up to a $295,000
increase and that to me
would be kind of similar to what and I'm
sure I'm forgetting stuff in there but
that to me would bring us to what Bill
kind of mentioned earlier which is an
equivalent
thing for our schools.
>> That's a
roughly at the 6% level, by the way.
It's
>> 6%'s like a 273 increase. So if you're
at 295300, it's a little over six.
And that's back of the napkin math,
everybody, obviously. But thank you,
Nick, for doing that.
>> Yeah, that's the only way I could do it.
And I just wanted to like kind of go
through look at it again. I'm probably
missing stuff, but this is the
information I have in front of me and
this is um kind of what I was just
doing and to help support conversation
here.
>> Thank you, Nick, for that. Um, it's
unfortunate that we don't have all the
information we need to make a really
valid type of decision. I mean, we're
just speculating,
but thanks for the the math.
>> All right.
Uh, so yeah, we have the 5% motion on
the floor. Uh, thank you, Nick, for
that. Do do we have any further thoughts
or should I Why don't we go ahead and
call for a vote?
All right.
>> All right. Bill,
>> no.
>> Bill's a no. Kim,
>> yes.
>> Liz,
>> Louise,
>> yes.
>> Right. Heather,
>> no.
>> Uh, oh my god, who did I miss?
>> Nick.
>> Sorry, you were just talking. I missed
you.
>> No. All right. Um, and it doesn't matter
what I do, actually. Well, I either if I
vote yes, it passes. But I'm I'm going
to go ahead and vote no on that one. But
I'm going to follow it by saying let's
try the 6% and see if we can get
>> Is that a motion, Rob?
>> I'm going to I'm going to follow that.
Yeah, I will make that motion. I uh 6%
to be clear. I want to I want to do the
math for you guys.
Again, by my math using the spreadsheet,
the last spreadsheet I had um from Lisa.
And Lisa, you can correct me if my
numbers are off at some point. Please
tell me. Um, but at 6% what I get is
as the increase. 6 uh 273 92772.
That's keying off
uh last year's number which hopefully is
accurate in this spreadsheet. So it's
about a $274,000
increase. It is slightly above but just
slightly half of the original ask.
Um and as we we've talked about five and
a half as well. I understand I'm going
to try the six. We'll see where we go.
Um I do think it's a significant
increase. I think it is responsive. It
is if even if it isn't the you know
three and a half four level I think it
is serious significant and the board of
ed will have to some serious work to do
if we pass that through. Um they'll have
to make some significant they'll almost
certainly have to make staffing changes.
So I don't think that's a minor thing.
Um so that's my proposal. Uh, I make
that motion. Uh, does anyone want to
second it?
>> I'll second it.
>> Yeah, given it was your idea, that makes
sense. Uh, further discussion on this. I
don't want to shut anything down.
>> I don't think it'll pass.
>> I I don't think it'll pass.
>> You don't You don't support it at the 6%
level.
>> I I don't know if it'll pass the town. I
I think the further we go up from Right.
I don't I don't wonder if it'll pass.
I think if we stay closer to the five
five and a half maybe. Um but I I just
don't know if it the taxpayers will move
forward. I mean we won't know until it
goes.
>> I don't want to go above six.
>> I don't want
>> Sorry. Go ahead. Go ahead. Go ahead. Go
ahead.
>> I don't want to go above six.
Um,
>> but I don't
>> but I don't think I mean the further a
higher we go the less likely it's going
to pass the town anyway. So
>> Oh yeah,
>> I think six is probably the max that
>> that we could possibly get to pass.
>> Hang on a second here.
>> Yeah, that's just my opinion based on
>> what's the difference between plus six
and plus five and a half dollars
dollar-wise like 20 something thousand.
Um, sorry. I have crowd. I didn't do I
did five and I did six. So five is
228ish.
Six is 274ish. So you're
>> every 1% is $50,000.
>> Yeah. B 40. So last year last year's
school budget was 4.5 million and
change, right? So every percentage point
>> is 45,000 and change.
>> So it's about $25,000 difference between
22827.
>> Yep.
>> Sorry, what was that, Lisa?
>> 22827
is the difference between the two.
>> Thank you.
>> Yep.
>> That's the difference between
>> we're down to we're pretty close here.
>> We're pretty close here in terms of
what we're talking about whether we're
at five and a half or at six. Um,
and
>> what is the difference again from f from
five and a half to six?
>> 22,827.
>> That was muffled. I'm sorry I couldn't
hear that.
>> 22,827.
>> Um, the other number I think that might
be just helpful for the discussion is
what cut does if we passed at six, what
does that represent? What cut does that
represent from the current ask? You
know, in other words, after the prior
cut. So, they they're at like 450 right
now uh for for an increase after we made
that $50,000 cut last time. This would
represent a further cut of about 175.
174261 is what I get. So, just just to
be clear, this cut is over triple the
cut we made last time. I'm not saying
that it's going to satisfy it would
satisfy everybody. I and I I'm not
making prognostications about vote
results, but what I will say is I don't
think that can be just
viewed as ignoring
what happened. Um it's again it's it's a
$50,000 cut plus $175,000 cut. You know,
now we're at having cut them about 225
if we were to pass this, which is I
think a significant whack at that
budget.
And I understand everybody's thoughts on
how we got here and where we're going. I
do.
Um, sorry. So, that just just points of
clarification so we understand the
numbers and what we're looking at doing.
Oh, I'm sorry. I have people in the
waiting room again. Goodness gracious,
people keep joining. Um, all right. Do
we have any further discussion or do we
want to take a vote on the six before we
move on? I don't I don't want to cut
anybody off. Further thoughts?
This is a big deal.
All right.
Then I will call for a vote.
>> Who Who motioned? Can I
>> What's Can you remind Can you remind me
who motioned? I'm trying to keep track
of this stuff.
>> I made I I I made the motion. Bill
second it.
>> Rob. Okay.
Second.
Okay.
>> Apologies for the glare behind me by
Okay. Go ahead. Go ahead.
>> Okay. Sorry. Uh, we will around. Um,
I'll start with you.
>> No, don't start with me.
>> Okay. I won't start with you. I'll I'll
start with Bill. How about that? We'll
make it easy.
>> Make it easy. Yep.
>> Yes.
>> Bill is Yes. All right. I will go to
Nick.
Nick, you're muted.
>> I have a go back, too.
Very well. I'll go to Kim.
>> Give me a minute, please.
>> Okay, you ponder. Everybody ponder. Put
your thinking caps on.
>> Um, okay. So, we have one yes in Bill.
Um,
>> well, we have you. You're a yes, I'm
sure.
>> Well, I made the motion, so you can
pretty much figure what I'm going to do,
but I haven't voted yet. But if you
want, I'll throw it on the record. I'll
vote yes. It's there, too. All right,
Louise.
>> Oh, Louise,
>> I'll I'll say no.
>> Okay, Louise is a no.
Now, I want I want to ask for
volunteers. Who's ready to vote?
>> I'll say yes.
>> You'll say yes.
>> Yep.
>> So, we're at three. We got one. No.
>> And we have some people who are really
trying to decide. And I I don't want to
rush you, but I also want to
make a decision.
Rob, I'm gonna say no.
>> Okay.
>> I think it sets the stage for more
problems down the road.
>> Understood. Understood.
We're at three to two.
>> I think I'm going to say no to um I
agree. Um I would be more inclined with
5.5.
I'm sorry if that's I'm sorry if that
sounds petty, but um
>> we all draw a line somewhere, Liz.
>> Yeah. My my high point in my mind was
like, okay, I'll go to five, but I'm
willing to Yeah. 5.5 is like in my
brain. So, and I I don't need to poo poo
anybody else's point. But
>> no, we all do that. We all do that. We
came I came into this meeting higher, so
don't worry.
>> Who Whose left? I'm sorry.
>> Me. I shot myself in the foot. I I'm
gonna say yes.
>> All right.
>> I I think
I I thinking it over. I think it's a
fair compromise between the two
different levels. So,
>> yeah,
>> I'm gonna say yes.
>> Okay. Uh apologies. So, that's that's
four to three.
>> Uh that is everybody.
>> I would have loved if we could have
Yeah. Anyway, so that's four to three.
So me, Nick,
Bill, and Heather are yeses. Um,
>> so 6% passes.
>> Okay.
>> 6% passes. As I understand it, Lisa, you
can double check my math on this. As I
understand it, that brings their
increase down to just shy of 274. 273,
927 is what I get.
Can you double check my math on that,
please?
>> She's shaking her head. Yes, but
you're muted, Lisa.
>> Oh, yeah. Sorry. Uh 4839390.
Rob, is that what you got?
>> What? What? Oh, sorry. You're looking at
the to You're looking at the total. I
apologize. I was looking at the
increase.
>> Yeah,
>> I got 4,839,
38,972.
>> Okay. So, I rounded to 390. Yep.
>> Yep.
>> Okay.
So, that that is where we are now at.
Um,
let me look at this.
Well, I'm not going to you know what?
I'm not going to mess with the
spreadsheet for a second. We'll let Lisa
change the
>> Well, I was going to go into the uh mill
rate and see what that
>> That's the document that Yeah, my
version of that is what I've been
playing with to get to do all the
percentages because it's the easiest
document to work with. But yes, by all
means, um, you can let me know what that
means in terms of mills and this and
that and the other.
>> All right. So, I have a a total budget
of 13358
338412.
>> You say one more time. 133
>> 338412. Let me double check that.
13338412.
>> Rob, can do you have your mill rate
calculator?
>> I have my mill rate chart up, but I I'm
I'm working on the AAS line now. uh
checks out at 6% the 4,839,38972
and I just want to make sure that
propagates accurately
um to the total be raised by taxation
number because I'm not sure that it is
automatically doing that.
So just bear with me for a second.
Total Yeah, there we go. Minus K33.
Yeah, I don't think that. Okay. I don't
think it's automatically propagating.
What is the total expenditure number you
have, Lisa?
>> 13338412.
>> Okay. So, if I plug that in,
I'm getting a total beer raised by
taxation increase of 1.28 and a Miller
rate of 31.68.
Is that what you're getting?
>> No.
>> Okay. So something I I must have done
something wrong. What? What's Let's find
it.
>> To be raised by taxes.
>> Well, to be raised by taxes, I'm now
getting 10,131759.
>> Correct. What were the other figures you
said? I have 3168 for 31.68 for a mill
rate.
>> So do we. So do I. We're there.
>> And 3.3%.
>> Yeah, that's a.3% increase in the mill
rate. But I also calculated the increase
in total be raised by taxes from last
year and that's 1.28. The reason they
don't match being the grand list and
things like that,
>> right?
>> Revenue.
>> Okay.
>> So, I mean, just to be clear, you know,
from a from the Mill rate standpoint,
that's that's a pretty big change. Um,
we are well under
the motor vehicle cap level. We don't
have to worry about that if this were to
pass. Uh, and bear in mind again
everybody, um, RAM's going to have to
have another cut of their ops budget.
Uh, so
that is going to go to referendum.
Um, we have more items on our old
business to attend to. We have review.
>> When would that referendum be, Rob? That
would be
>> That is a good question. Two weeks.
>> June 12th.
>> June 12th. Thank you, Liz.
>> When would the town meeting be? No. Is
that the town meeting or the referendum
vote?
>> Town meeting would be next Tuesday.
>> Next Tuesday,
>> June 2nd.
>> Excuse me.
>> Referendum would be the 19th.
>> I'm sorry. You're right.
>> Check with Robera. She said two weeks,
which would be the 26th.
>> I don't.
>> I'm sorry.
>> Wait a minute. I take it back. I think
it's June 16th is the referendum.
>> June 16th will be the referendum. two
weeks after June.
>> The 16th.
>> Yeah, I'm sorry. I misspoke.
>> No worries.
>> The
>> It's always on Tuesday.
>> Before that, the one week before that
would be the town referendum.
>> Town meeting.
>> No, town meeting will be this following
Tuesday.
>> This coming Tuesday. Okay.
>> I think it's pretty fast.
>> Which is the second? Is that true? June
2nd. Okay.
>> Now then I guess the question
>> I can confirm the succ
of ed meeting
>> uh
>> Monday.
>> Monday. So we would know
>> after Monday night going into Tuesday uh
town meeting what you guys do. We have
one scheduled for Monday and one for
Wednesday. We hope it's not to need the
Wednesday one.
>> Um
>> All right. Well, here's hoping.
>> Yeah, you guys reach consensus Monday
night.
>> Yep. Monday is a um we have to have a a
me a public meeting. Not just a public
meeting, but a you know a
>> hearing
>> like not is Yeah, it's more like a
hearing. We have to have that and then
we're going to follow up with a a board
meeting and if we can get consensus
there from between those two, we'll have
a budget for you that night.
>> Okay, great. Thanks, Scott. All right.
Um, sorry, I didn't want to I'm not
opening it up to full public comment,
but I know he's on the board and I just
wanted to get the dates right. So, my
hope would be that going into our next
town meeting, we might be able to inform
the public as to what Ram did, but we
don't know that for certain. Um
okay
so uh teacher my brain is full but no we
have to go on old business
>> the
>> um well we have wait I don't see I see
review of budget to actual is the next
>> I'm sorry
>> yep
uh we do have a packet here um I I've
been trying to catch up on emails and
you know and work and everything like
that so I haven't reviewed the budget to
actual uh going into this meeting. I
just didn't have time. Uh did any of you
have the opportunity to do that?
>> I I didn't either to tell you the truth.
Um I mean maybe we could look at lines
that look like where we're over real
quick and just see if it makes sense.
>> Sure.
>> Um unless anybody else has some strong
opinions.
>> No, that sounds good.
>> That makes sense to me.
Um,
>> so going down the
first place where I seen where we're
negative is in the community center.
Um, and we understand why that is.
>> We had a situation with the community
center director. Uh,
>> yes.
>> Yep.
>> Yes. All right.
>> So, we're essentially paying two people,
right?
>> We were.
>> We were. Yeah.
that's been rectified.
>> It's not that it's not that we were we
had to pay the community center director
for the time that she was off,
>> right?
>> Yep.
>> Okay.
Um and then the other one is the town
garage and that was
we're over by Well, it's 1.23.7%.
It looks like we're over
computer supplies. We're over in office
supplies. And we're over in fuel oil.
>> Fuel oil.
>> Now, we usually lock in on fuel oil.
>> Not to a point you got past using up
what you used up and then it goes to
market rate.
>> Oh, I see. So, if we consume too much,
we kick off the the the lock in.
>> Yep. Yep.
>> I have a gun. So, we're 12,000.
>> This is a bad time to be buying diesel.
So,
>> Yep. Mhm.
>> Ouch. Okay.
>> So, that is where
>> and we're already locked in for next
year, right? So, that's a set amount as
well.
>> Yes.
>> I mean, a set amount in terms of
gallons.
>> Yeah. But or no price?
>> Well, no. what if I'm understanding
correctly, it's both that if we utilize
too many gallons, we we we use up our
lock in which is what we're talking
about now. So that would be the same
case next year. So,
>> uh I hope we adjusted that. Um but if we
didn't, we didn't. Um, but there's an
example of we have to make sure that we
are locking in for I don't know if they
how much leeway we have with the oil
company with whatever consortium we use
for our amount
of lock in if that makes sense.
>> Well, I could be wrong, but the reason
we went over this year is because we use
so much for the storms.
>> Yeah. No, we had we had a we had a
tougher snow year than usual, right?
>> So, that makes sense. Um,
>> and then everything that's happened in
the econ, you know, in the economy, that
hasn't helped either.
>> Well, sure.
>> We didn't know that. Yeah, we didn't
know that. I don't think we knew that
when that contract was
negotiated.
>> In fact, I think
>> No, we have to do our the contract gets
negotiated.
You know, it's already I think for next
year. So,
>> anyway, I was just I was just asking.
All right. So, go on, Liz. I apologize.
>> Okay. So going down the old firehouse
were over but by $4,000 $4,700.
Wait,
>> wait a minute. No, that's total
facilities.
>> The fire
>> total facilities.
>> Total facilities.
>> That's the subtotal down there. Yeah.
>> Okay. Okay. So overall in that
facilities category although the town
garage is at 123.7% our total percent of
budget is 112%.
Right.
>> Am I reading that right?
>> Yeah.
>> Okay.
>> The total facilities Yeah. is 112. So we
are over
>> but and we knew we were we knew we were
over in snow removal.
>> Yeah.
>> Um
Yeah, I don't see
uh PNZ commission's way up. If if memory
serves, that's because there's a
dispute.
I could be wrong.
>> Where's that? Are you saying PNZ or you
saying town attorney?
>> I scroll. I scroll. That's up too, but I
was scrolling past that. I'm on page
six, but
>> so PNZ is page six. That's over by 6500
plus.
And where's the town attorney?
>> Wait a minute. Wait a minute. What am I
looking at here? Over budget. Oh, I see.
Okay. Yep. Town attorneys. Back up. I'm
sorry. You have to back up to page five.
Five, I think.
>> Page four.
>> Page four. top middle of the page
>> totally skinned by that.
>> Yeah.
Under facilities a few lines.
>> Yep.
>> I think that's why we raised him up this
year because
>> we knew
>> it was coming.
>> That's not for the town attorney. That's
there are items in there related to
other attorneys that have dealt with
issues
that we've had to deal with related to
>> HR and things
>> other other items. Yeah.
HR issues related to community center
director
>> so on
>> and then you have you have the whole
>> assessor's legal which is related to
legal proceedings that
we have to verify if we got our money
back.
>> Got your money back. So the line 107312
5302 assessor legal.
>> Yeah.
>> They had some cases where they had to um
fight
for the assessed value that they have.
So we have to determine if that's if
there's any of that money that is
potentially coming back. So, we're way
over budget on that because of the legal
fights with the assessor and
we've just got to look at that line
item.
>> So, if money comes back, does it
>> I guess if money if money comes back,
does it get applied to that or
>> It would get applied to that account. It
might not fall into this fiscal year.
Might not get the money back till next
fiscal year.
>> Okay.
>> But we're going to have to figure out a
way of transferring money in to cover
that over budget.
Okay.
>> But you also deserve to know the
information that caused the death.
>> Yes.
>> In detail.
>> Appreciate. Yep. Thank you.
>> Okay. Anybody else? Let's see.
I think we've already discussed these
public work increases, right? The
temporary salary, that was big. The
membership fees, that's big. We already
discussed those last time, I think.
>> Yeah. I sent you an email about those.
>> Yeah.
Okay.
Uh do we have anything on further on
budget actual? Can we move on to check
register, guys?
>> I'm good. Let's move.
>> All right. So, check register. Um, I
just noticed the very first thing on
there is a deposit in this looks like
the stiff account of $750,000.
Uh, Lisa, can you just give me a quick
explainer on that?
>> Um, yeah, we had to transfer it in to
cover our bills.
>> Transfer from from what? General fund
>> from staff.
Oh, it's that's sorry that's that's
coming.
>> Yeah, that's step into that, right?
Because if you look what's followed
right after it because don't forget this
is the time of year when we don't have
the t the taxes are coming in quarterly.
>> Yeah.
>> So, we're having to wait until they come
in again the next quarter.
>> So, you had to pay the two schools. That
alone right there is 700 $800,000.
>> Okay.
Yep.
>> Bunch of payroll.
>> Anything anything you want to highlight
for us, Lisa? Is there anything that
jumped out at you?
No, it's a difficult I'll say it's a
difficult time of year because
everyone's trying to figure out what
they have left. Um and just trying to
keep up. Um I do have the new assistant
treasurer and she's getting right on top
of, you know, trying to get everything
lined up. It's going to take a little
bit, but um she's helping a lot with the
bills, getting the bills in.
>> Okay.
Lisa, can can you tell me what howerin
and sage is on April 14th?
>> Yeah, she's got that
>> 22,108.
>> Jeff, do you want to answer to that?
Isn't that what you were just talking
of?
>> No, that's that's
>> that's
>> How and Sage is the attorney that uh
we have an animal abuse case within the
town.
Our
animal control service is CO um
NECOG
and
th those are primarily bills related to
the legal proceedings related to the
resident.
It is something that
>> uh
totally unforeseen
and
it is something that is um
not productive use of our money.
>> It shouldn't have been spent
>> but
>> um
>> we have to find a better way to deal
with those types of cases. So, in this
case, a dog and two frogs were taken
from the resident and they're being kept
at NECOG.
Um, and these are legal fees related to
the
disposition of those animals.
>> It's unfortunate.
>> There was one other one I just saw.
Little Oh, okay. Okay, never mind. The
memo answered it. Millennium Builders.
That's the playground. I assume that's
down at uh
>> the ball field.
>> Okay.
>> Playground. Yeah.
>> By the way, you should take a look down
there. I know the Long Hill Bridge is
done, but um
Scott Persona and Christine Rendazzo
have done a great job shephering that
project through. It's should be
completed within the next 30 days. It
looks It looks great. It looks really
>> down there. It looks really good. Yeah,
looks really good.
>> Yeah, I've seen uh the progress. I
haven't seen the latest uh in the last
week or so, but um we can still get
through there even though the bridge is
out, right? The bridge is after.
>> Yeah.
>> Oh, that's good.
>> Pendy Road and down Long Hill.
>> Oh, you got to go that way.
>> Yeah,
>> it's the only way to go.
>> Pain.
>> Oh god, now I feel bad. Now I can relate
to the people in Bunker Hill, what they
had to deal with.
>> Yep. Only they had to go all the way up
through Coventry and come down like
>> Yep. Oh, those poor people.
>> Yeah, that was not an easy detour.
>> Yeah. How long do you expect um Jeeoff,
how how long do you expect that that
project to last? The bridge.
>> This is supposed to be completely
>> supposed to be completed this fall.
>> Oh, okay.
>> Not too too bad. I guess it's not years.
Do we do we have a another one of those
projects coming down the pike at all? In
other words, one of these fully
reimbursed, but you know, really big
project.
>> Nothing in the future is going to be
fully reimbursed,
>> right? I mean, we got big projects like
Bzola,
>> right? We have town stuff that we get
maybe 50% I think is the is the the
match. So what I'm what I'm saying is,
you know, in terms of the disposition of
the money in the in the fund, that's
that's what I'm thinking about
the the once we've closed the books on
that bridge, then we have to decide what
to do uh you know and look at our funds
because we have those needs for bridges
and culver
there's quite a plan on the culverts
that have to be done already. So
>> yeah, I mean I think I think we want to
maybe once we get through the budget
cycle that we should have a meeting
where we mostly go through kind of uh
what's our plan? What's our order of
operations here and what's the where are
we in terms of do we need to you know
transfer some money from one to another
to properly account for it and to you
know think about how much we can bite
off in a given year and prioritize and
all that. I know we have I think I know
we we for for years now we've been
talking about which one goes first but
you know looking down the pike more like
five years would be good.
Does anybody have anything further on
the check register?
>> No.
>> Nope.
Okay.
>> We are looking at
>> donation request is still on here. Um me
I'd like to punt on this again. I I just
don't think we got too much going on to
to deal to talk about that anymore. And
once, you know, once Alisa has like 10
minutes of free time, um, we can revisit
that issue and maybe put it to bed. So,
I would say let's move on from 5D unless
anybody objects.
Okay. So, new business 6A, we already
moved. So 6B is appointment of auditor
required by 53126, which I didn't think
I fully realized. Um, we've been using
the same auditor for years now.
Uh, I think we've been pleased. Does
anybody have feedback on that? Uh, I
know in the past we've had trouble even
getting
other quotes for an auditor to do our
books.
Um
>> my only Yeah. My only feedback is um I
would like them to come and present to
us the audit so we can understand it.
>> Yeah.
>> We had a meeting last year on it and we
haven't had one yet this year. I don't
remember at what point in the year we
had it.
>> Um so I would like him to come and do
that. And my other question is right now
it's still in draft. When is it
finalized? How does it get finalized?
>> Right. I thought we were really close
but yes, what is that final step?
It is final. Didn't I send it to you,
Rob? When we
>> You sent me I know I'm going through my
emails. You sent me something. Hold on.
I wasn't clear if it was 100% final.
Sorry. Um,
what would you remember what day what
date that email was? Because I'm I'm
going through looking for the for the
email. I just want to make sure. I
thought I had I usually try to
>> couple weeks ago, I believe, when we
were working on one of the
the second referendum maybe.
Mhm.
Cuz I mean, if I didn't send that around
to the board, I apologize to you all. Uh
I should have forwarded it. Let me take
a look.
>> I can look in my scent.
>> Yeah, I'm trying to find
I see you know where you sent me charts
and revised budget budget charts, but
I'm trying to find the uh the audit. I
know you sent it to me, but I'm having
trouble finding it.
>> Yeah, because we it was on a Friday or
Saturday or something and I was working
on the
um charts with you,
>> right?
And because we were talking about uh
what the potential um 2425 underspend
was or not just under spend, we had we
had a over we were over on revenue and
>> May 11th.
>> May 11th. Ah, that would explain why I
wasn't finding it. There it is. Thank
you.
Final. Yep, you are correct. You did
send me a final. I'm going to I'm going
to email this around to the board.
Sorry, guys.
I apologize. I should have gotten this
to you before. I I don't think I fully
caught that it was the true final.
So, sorry.
So, we do have it. Uh we haven't
obviously Mahoney and Sable has been our
auditor now for several years actually
probably more than several
um I can't recall the last so we should
absolutely have them come in typically
in the past I think obviously we had to
wait until they were done but they're
done now so we could try to tee that up
for our next meeting if we could get
them to come in I because I completely
agree with you Liz I that's standard for
them to
>> come in if we could get them to come in
June That'd be great. Oh, although
>> I'm not sure.
>> I did mention it to him. He didn't get
back to me. I did mention it to Michael
a couple of weeks ago back when we were
when we had the final.
>> Liz, if you're going to miss it, you
know, if you want to if we want to do it
in July, I mean, I wouldn't be against
that either.
>> Let's see. Uh, let me look my calendar.
The next meeting is our meeting is June
23rd, right? Is that our next board of
finance meeting? June 23rd or is it
>> I have it the 24th.
Oh, we're on Wednesdays. Yeah,
Wednesdays. Okay. 20. Yeah, I won't be
here. I will be
>> in Alabama.
>> Alabama. All right.
>> Alabama.
>> So, I will not be here for the next
month. So,
>> what do we do? Do are we always the
fourth? We're the on
>> I think we're the fourth.
>> So, like July 22nd would be
probably the meeting after that. I don't
know if we've even set them all the way
that far out, but um we could see if we
could get them for that
for July 22nd.
Lisa, is that something that like you're
in contact with them, right? Was that
>> I can ask them again? Yeah. Okay.
>> I won't be here probably July 22nd, but
it doesn't matter. I don't I've looked
at it millions of times.
>> Sure. Sure. I mean, I think what it
really boils down to, and Liz Liz can
speak to this, too, is that
>> when we sat down to go through the one
of the drafts, right? It's easy to get
turned around. It's really nice to have
the auditor there to answer the
>> answer. Yeah, that's what I'm used to
also. Yeah.
>> Yeah. So, let's see if we can set that
up.
>> That's a good That's a good point, Liz.
Thank you. Uh, we definitely want to go
through that and I I do want to have a
sense for what
is in those funds and how we can better
track them and that sort of thing and
maybe the auditor might have thoughts on
that. That might be a good conversation.
So, sorry, appointment of auditor. ever.
So, I mean, unless there's an objection,
I mean, I think we I can't remember, by
the way, and Jeff, chime in here if you
can recall the last time that we
actually
thought about whether we could change
auditors or if there's somebody else out
there. My my recollection was we were
lucky to kind of lucky to have them, but
>> you're unmuted, by the way.
>> I I don't think it's something that
we look at right now. I think you
appoint the auditor for next fiscal year
and then if it's something that the
board of finance wants to sit there and
consider then we go out to quote in in
an appropriate timeline because if we do
it now we're going to hamstring
ourselves.
>> Right. Fair enough. That's that's very
good. I just my general thinking on this
just so everybody on the board
understands it is I cannot recall the
last time we did that and it's probably
just good practice to do it every so
many years. uh so that we're not just
locking ourselves into to one auditor
even though I think we're happy with
them. So, but anyway, in in the interest
of moving this meeting forward and doing
what we need to do, um I'll go ahead and
make a motion to uh formally reappoint
Mahonian Stable Company LLP as our
auditor. And this would be for the next
fiscal year. Um or rather the one we're
in now, right? That the audit would be
for 2526, correct?
>> Yep.
So that's my motion.
>> I'll second.
>> Liz seconds. Very good.
Unless there's any discussion, I'll take
a vote. Anybody? Anybody? Anybody gone
once, gone twice? Anybody discussion?
No. Okay. Uh, very good. Bill,
>> yes.
>> Nick,
>> yes. Kim,
>> yes.
>> Luis,
>> Liz,
>> yes.
Heather.
>> Yes.
>> And I'm Yes. 70. Mahoney Sable will be
our auditor again. Uh but we can revisit
the issue.
>> And actually that's something I should
try to track down is how long we've been
using them. I think it's been a while
now.
Okay.
Very good. Lazison reports. Um I don't
have anything. The one item that I had
from CIP we already dealt with.
uh the fire department request. Does
anybody have anything from any other
boards, commissions, etc.?
>> Okay. Hearing none, we'll move on to
agenda item eight, which is, you know, a
A through E is various meeting minute
approvals.
>> Can I make a motion we we pass on this
for till next month?
>> I was liter You beat me, too.
>> Thank you, Liz.
It's It's 900 p.m. and I didn't have a
chance to look at them. So, yes,
>> I agree.
>> So, what I from what I understand, I
think we can ask Kate to post them and
we can always review them and if we find
changes, then we can send her the
changes. I think that's
>> right.
>> And that way, at least they're up there.
>> Yeah. I mean, it's getting a little down
the pike and you don't want to have it
not there for for too long. All right.
If that's if that's acceptable
procedure, and frankly, I haven't
thought about it. Uh I'm I'm not against
it.
>> I'll second the motion.
>> Um wait a minute. All right. So, the
motion, I guess, is to accept that
there's a motion is that we're going to
ask Kate to to post them in kind of in
draft form as they are now, and that if
we find revisions that we'll ask her to
make them.
>> All right. Yes.
>> We'll go ahead and say that Liz is
proposing that and Bill's seconding it.
Uh, all right. Uh, call for vote, Nick.
Oh, no. You're drinking. I'll pass on
you, Kim.
>> You're drinking.
>> He was his water bottle and I'm like,
>> poor guy sputtering. I'm like, vote.
Vote.
>> He's choking.
>> Anyway, Kim, I'm sorry I
>> didn't hear you.
>> You're a yes. Heather,
>> yes.
>> Okay. Um, Bill,
>> Nick, you're with us.
>> Yes. Okay. Yep. Uh Louise.
>> Yes.
>> Liz.
>> Uh yes.
>> And me. Yes. That sounds like a good
plan. Um are you gonna do you do you
want do are you going to reach out to
her or do you want me to do it?
>> It doesn't really matter.
>> Yeah. I can send her an email.
>> I got work in the morning. If you don't
mind doing it, I'd be thrilled. Um, but
I I don't want to I'm a bit I can be
scatterrained and I don't want to miss
it.
>> No, you
>> me
>> stop.
>> Never
>> scatterrained. Come on.
>> I don't I don't have anything going on,
Liz. You know, it's just
>> I know. I know.
>> All right. So, anyway, moving on. Um,
>> so we have board open discussion. I
don't know if I think we've talked about
a lot, but if anybody has anything else
to bring up, now is the time. Otherwise,
we'll move on to correspondence and
public speak.
>> Sounds good.
>> I'd like to bring up that that Nick has
a beautiful sunset. I wish I was where
he was.
>> Where is he? Look at that.
>> That was in San Diego.
>> In your mind,
>> Oceanside. I'm sorry. It was a little
north of San Diego.
>> Yeah. Okay.
>> Anyway.
>> Yeah.
>> Let's Yeah.
>> Uh yes.
It's all good. Um, the only
correspondent I mean we all get emails.
Uh, we got a we had a letter from
um the principal about AES. I think we
all saw it. Uh, I hope we all saw it.
Uh, it's a little late to get to that,
but it's there. Uh, I don't know. We've
already made our decisions. I hope we
made it with with that in mind. Made
those decisions with that in mind.
That's what I had for
correspondence basically. Uh if anybody
else wants to bring anything else
forward otherwise I'd like to move on
and um do a do our round of public speak
and ski dattle.
>> It'd be nice.
>> Then I got to this weekend I'll have to
revise the presentation again. Liz, hang
in there. We're almost through. I saw
that.
>> Sorry. I know. Sorry.
>> It's okay. All right. Uh can we So all
right. Uh, let's do public speak. Let's
go ahead and go around the room here.
Um, Lisa, I'm gonna skip you. We've been
talking to you all night.
All right. Uh, so let's see. The first
person who's still left on the call is
Anna.
>> Um, thank you for your discussions. I
just, um, no further comment here.
>> Okay. Thank you.
Oh, and by the way, before I end the
meeting and before I forget, I want to
thank everybody from the public who
comes and participates. It's helpful.
It's good to hear from you guys. Uh, so
the next one up is Brienne.
Going once, going twice. I'm going to
move on to Caitlyn.
Uh, I'm pretty disappointed as I'm sure
you could all imagine. Um, to say
devastation would probably be putting it
mildly. Um, in terms of what this will
mean for how it affects the school
directly. uh don't really know that 100%
but there will definitely uh be staff
cuts for sure and it will 100% affect um
you know how how kids are taught. Um and
to say that you read the letter from the
principal and think that what you guys
did tonight um was keeping in line with
that. It's 100% not. um the gains that
were made by kids in the school this
year were directly related to how
they're taught and at what level and
what interventions are able to be made.
Um the only other thing publicly as a
comment um the first selectman did make
a comment in regards to um how much of
uh certain special education um teachers
are related to preschool. Just to remind
everyone again, I know I'm kind of
beating a dead horse, but special
education costs for kids over age three
until they reach kindergarten are the
responsibility of the school system and
of our town and of taxpayers regardless
of whether or not we had a preschool, we
would still be responsible for those
costs. So, it doesn't really actually
matter what they are or where they are
in the budget or if they're not in the
budget and they're under the the um
preschool, we're still responsible for
them. Thank you.
Uh, Charlene Destro,
going once, going twice.
I'm going to move on to Patricia Kelly.
>> Hi. I'm just not sure how uh decisions
are made when there seems to be a lot of
unanswered questions about the schools.
I think that if there were more
transparency and there were more
collaboration between the school and the
town that this budget discussion would
not be so difficult. I hope that in the
future that there can be more
collaboration between the school and the
town um because we are all working
toward the same goal. Thank you.
Thanks. Uh, iPhone 2, aka Kathy.
>> No comment. Thank you.
>> Thanks,
Elizabeth Partridge.
>> Um, yes. Um, first of all, I'd like to
thank the board of finance for trying so
hard. Um but watching this as an
outsider, it appeared that there was
compromise on one side only and that
there were board members who spoke about
cuts as well as increases um uh such as
the prek tuition, but at the end of the
day, they would not compromise and
that's how it looked like from an
outsider point of view. And that's all I
wanted to say. Thank you,
>> Joanne.
Hi everyone. I'll keep it quick. Um, I
just started off saying that, you know,
all towns and school systems are going
through this. So, it it is hard. It's so
hard, but it's it's you've got to try to
keep the emotions out of it. And I'm
surprised that I I am able to do that
looking from the outside in. So, a
couple suggestions. You know, I won't
have any. I would think for the
transparency so everyone feels better.
Why don't you ask next year what Anna
had suggested? Um you know we don't need
any names but like teacher one, teacher
two, teacher three, get those salaries,
get the total. Um this insurance that
the town has currently I'm just looking
for change and for cost savings. This is
unsustainable.
Um I'd volunteer to try to get really
good policies and call around. I mean,
if they want to stay in the self-insured
business, but a 21% increase on the
staff members for the school and the
town is going to kill the town. So, I'm
looking at ways that, you know, cost
savings can be done with other things
that the town can do. Um, and the audit
balances, you guys usually had a final
report in April and had a meeting that
probably could have been helpful in this
process overall. So, you could have had
that information and known the balances.
And lastly, trying to wrap it up really
quick. Everybody's exhausted. Yeah.
>> Kind of pounding home my fund balance
thing that I've always said with savings
because you guys were able to approve a
$68,000 invoice or something like that.
I don't have it in front of me now for
the fire department simply because you
had built up such a high balance there
of over $300,000.
So, you were able to approve that in a
meeting. So, I'm hoping with fairness in
the future and and everybody should take
a trip to the fire department. It's
beautiful. The vehicles, the building,
you know, everything we've we've funded
that well. So, I'm hoping that in the
future maybe some of those fund balances
can take a little bit of a cut.
Everybody gets upset about any kind of
word of cut so that other things can be
funded. Thank you.
>> Thanks, Joanna. Uh, Julie,
>> hi. Uh, as somebody who works in the
building, I just want to say, you know,
I'm preemptively disappointed and upset
in how the the cuts are going to affect
the students that I see every day. Um,
and you know, the stress that it is
going to put on the building to try to
make do with what what we have been
approved. We're grateful for, you know,
any increase, but we really needed what
we were asking for. And unfortunately,
that just wasn't going to happen this
year. And I hope that that changes in
the future.
>> Thank you. Uh Kathleen,
>> I'm all set. Thank you very much. Um it
was a pleasure to watch your process.
Thank you.
>> Thanks,
uh Kevin.
Yeah, no comment. Thank you. Have a good
night.
>> Thanks.
Uh, next member of the public looks like
Marcy.
>> Hi. Uh, uh, no thanks. I don't have
anything to say other than the fact that
I appreciate all your hard work.
>> Thanks.
Uh, Scott,
>> sorry. I've got a few very quick things
to say. Um, first of all, like everyone
else, I'm very impressed with how hard
you guys work at this. This is not fun,
not pleasant, and you're doing a great
job. Um, comment on three things. One,
Joanne, just talk about being able to
negotiate insurance. There are
professionals involved in this who are
negotiating for a much bigger crew place
than just Andover. this is the best they
could do and it's the same across the
nation. Insurance rates are shooting way
up. Um and I know some of the reasons
but not worth going into here. Um so
Liz, we talked over and over. Um that
wasn't Liz, I'm sorry. Um Louise talked
over and over about transparency. I
found pretty much all of the information
that I heard anybody was asking for
available in the public. Wasn't always
easy to get to, but the stuff from the
board was right there on the board
packets. Um I the only thing that you
can't find is something they can't
legally give us which is the um benefits
stuff for the preschool because it's too
small a group. It's against HIPPA and
it's against Furpa to actually give out
that even collective information. Um and
last one was to Jeff Magcguire when we
talk about clawing back money and the
rate of growth and how terrible it's
going to be. It's got to point out this
budget has grown far under the rate of
inflation and again say we are the
lowest per pupil cost according to the
state of all the elementary districts in
in the state. Um those there's some
weird numbers about preschool but it's
still the lowest you just apples to
apples the lowest per pup people cost.
So balancing trying to balance the
budget on the back of the parents of
preschoolers doesn't strike me a good
idea and probably illegal if you go over
the cost of the preschool itself. I know
he's trying to oh give a little to this
and a little that
scary. Anyway, that's it. Thank you guys
again. You worked really hard.
Sharon,
>> hi. I uh I'll also just echo some of
what other folks said that I am really
disappointed in the uh cuts to the
school budget. It's um I I can't see any
other thing to do other than cut staff.
That's what's going to happen. And uh
cutting staff is going to mean larger
class sizes and larger class sizes
beyond what the Department of Education
recommends for students. We know what
that's going to mean. There's going to
be an impact to the kids. um they're not
going to receive the quality education
that they've been getting. And I just
hope going forward, I don't know what we
need to do to get more support from all
the boards in town. Um because that
would certainly help. Every year we have
a hard time passing a budget and um a
lot of it is because, you know, there's
not a lot of support from the leadership
across all boards in town. And I hope
going forward that we can work together
to figure out what we need to change uh
to make that happen cuz our kids deserve
better. Thanks.
>> Um
Valerie,
>> hello. Um so a couple of things. Um
first of all, we hear the word
transparency a lot. Um I don't think
transparency is the issue. I think it's
a double standard. Um, a couple things
that were spoken about tonight, uh,
insurance, for example, um, with all the
talk about my contract, you know, I've
asked over and over again about where
are the town contracts, and my answer is
always, well, we're not mandated to post
those, so we don't. Yours is mandated.
Um, I do think if the town wants to be
transparent that those contracts should
be up for everybody to see because when
we talk about insurance and the 21%
there was a huge expenditure in addition
to the salaries of $7,000 for employees
who don't take the insurance and I think
that that needs to be spoken about. Um,
it's difficult, very difficult when you
know there's a couple of of people on
here tonight making difficult cuts. I
understand that um to say that they
would feel successful if it was lower
than six and that they didn't think that
that would affect children. And I think
that between the board of education and
myself and the principal and the school,
um we do know what's right for children.
So I know the other part of the
conversation was we cut you last year
and we told you not to hire two teachers
and you did. Well, the board of
education and myself and the staff and
the principal, we knew that was what we
needed. It was what was right for
children and we had no choice. We had to
do that. And you know what? It worked.
They thrived this year and the scores
are going to be great. Um our our our
children are need to have an
academically sound environment. Um and
and we did that this year. So, I I felt
like we were being punished for doing
what was right for children in
understanding and recognizing that we
did need those staff members. And
lastly, I I know that there was that
mailer that went home and Mr. Magcguire
I respectfully you admit that your
wife's in the field of education. I I
know that after the number of years that
she's been an educator, she got top step
uh in her town. And so for us in the
town of Andover to say that teachers
that teach there uh make too much money,
their contract should be lower, that
kind of says we don't value and
appreciate them. And CA on a state level
will dictate that teachers contracts
need to be fair all around. And if
they're not, they take us to mediation.
And they do that because they want to
make sure that teachers everywhere are
getting a fair salary, whether it's
where your family works, Mr. Magguire or
where our staff works. So I think
everybody should know that that there is
a standard there and in our town I think
we have a double standard and moving
forward I would like that not to
continue. Thank you.
>> Okay. And then the last person I see is
just a phone number. Um 860804212.
>> That's me. This is Shannon.
Can you hear me?
>> Yes.
>> Great.
While I understand the negotiations this
evening, um I too am very disappointed
in the result. I don't believe that the
referendum results yesterday mandated
such a drastic cut and basically a 0%
mill rate increase.
>> I completely don't think that that was
called for.
And
I'll just echo what everybody else has
said. The result is of what you've done
tonight makes me very concerned about
the effects it's going to have on the
students and the teachers, whether we'll
be able to keep all of them and
ultimately the school. And for anybody
who doesn't believe that having a good
school is critical to having a thriving
town, you need to reconsider
because your property values are based
on the fact that we have such an
excellent school.
We are now the lowest per pupil spending
of elementary schools amongst all
elementary districts.
elementary only districts that can't
help but have an effect on our school
and therefore on our town and therefore
on your property values. So please
consider that when you're just looking
at the school, its budget and a budget
increase. It affects you even if you
don't support the school. Thank you.
All right, I made it through. I know
there was a person or two as I went
through that, you know, they didn't
respond, so I I skipped them. If any of
you who got skipped,
speak up now or forever hold your peace.
All right, hearing none. Do we have a
motion to adjurnn?
>> I make the motion to adjurnn.
>> Bill moves to adjurnn. Any second?
>> I'll second it.
Louise got there first.
>> I hope you feel better, Louise. Um, I'll
take a vote on that. Um, we'll just go
around. Bill's first on my screen. Bill,
>> yes.
>> I'm a yes. Nick,
>> Liz,
>> yes.
>> Heather,
>> Kim,
>> yes.
>> Luis,
>> At seven to zero, we adjourn. Um, like I
said everybody, I will work on the
presentation for the meeting. Lisa,
you'll get the updated spreadsheets up
on the website when you can.
>> Yeah, I'm not.
>> Thank you.
>> Yep. In a these two days, but I'll get
it to Kate tomorrow.
>> Awesome.
>> Thank you.
>> Yep. Okay.
>> Thank you everyone. This is a tough one.
Good night.
>> Good night.
>> Thank you.
See, stop recording.